- Let's turn our attention to another hotspot
for Spring application performance and that is Hibernate.
Now to be clear, Hibernate itself is not a problem.
It's a prevalent and very convenient solution
to a difficult task which is the work
of connecting your application to a data store.
It allows for convenient configuration-based mapping
of database tables, rows, and columns directly
to your Java objects.
That's what ORM means, Object-Relational Mapping.
This can speed up development tremendously
because it hides a lot of boilerplate code,
abstraction of the complexity of the database management
from the developer.
And while often it will perform just fine,
there is also a downside
that the actual database interactions can become invisible
and actually may perhaps not even understood
by the developer who's coding along happily
in their integrated development environment,
or even more importantly to the ops support team.
Much is written, there is much to learn
about the intricacies of database performance
and with it Hibernate performance.
This lesson will hit the essential points
that a developer should understand.
Our special focus though is going to be on observability
of these metrics that are so important to the end result
of a high-performing and resilient application.
Let's talk about connection pooling.
At a rather high level connection pooling
saves you the expense of making a new database connection
every time you need data.
It's a time consuming, resource consuming thing,
to make a database connection across the network.
And by pooling you can contain a group of JDBC connections
in a pool that remain hot, so to speak, ready to use,
your application can borrow a connection from the pool,
use it, and then return it to the pool
for the next bit of code to reuse.
The important properties on a connection pool
are the size of the pool and the timeout of the connections.
The more connections you have in your pool,
the more memory it's going to take
from your available memory but you will be guaranteed
to have one available at all times,
but that pool is smaller, you use less memory,
but you may have to create new ones on the fly.
So some memory trade-offs with that.
Usually what's typically done in practice
is you take a guess at what might be a good number
of connections based on other applications that seem
to be working well within your enterprise.
Or maybe you will just take the Spring defaults
and then you want to monitor the effectiveness.
With Spring and Hibernate we can track
our connection pool performance over time,
and that is the hard part.
That's the part we often forget about
and we're going to cover that observability piece
of it shortly in this lesson.
The second high level topic I'd like
to talk about is caching.
Caching is the technique of reusing data for a period
of time, saving the expense of additional database queries
when that data that you're looking for
is already available in the cache.
Similar in concept to web application caching,
Hibernate has both a session scope cache,
which we call level one.
A level one cache is enabled by default.
And also an application scoped cache,
which we call level two caching.
Application scoped level two caching
must be explicitly enabled.
And most of the studies to be done on caching effectiveness
are in relation to level two caching.
At a high level, some of the important,
configurable properties that you can apply
to your cache are concurrency,
that is, is it a read-only cache for instance,
or can you also write to the cache,
the size of your cache,
the age of data store inside the cache,
and how much memory you will allow your cache to take.
Just speaking at a high level,
entities are made cacheable in Hibernate
by using the cacheable annotation on an entity
and the concurrency and such you can configure by entity.
Kind of like connection pooling, in practice,
we usually take a good guess
at what these configuration values ought to be.
And then again, the important part is
to monitor the results to see if your cache
is performing effectively.
Looking at hits and misses and things like that
are how you know if your caching is effective.
On to observability pretty soon.
But first let's talk about lazy loading.
Lazy loading is the third kind of hot topic
that you'll encounter when you work with Hibernate.
Lazy loading is a feature in which Hibernate
delays data fetching until the runtime
actually requires the use of the object.
So the real world advantages of lazy loading
are significant enough that most of the time
it's the right approach.
In particular, it's very important
for those situations where you have many-to-many
or one-to-many relationships.
This is a common enough problem that it has a name,
it's called the N Plus One Problem of Hibernate querying.
The issue is when you have a one-to-many
or many-many to relationships,
sometimes you don't need to fetch all the manys.
You just need a few of them.
And if you tell Hibernate to lazy load your application
and Hibernate will be smart enough to not do a bunch
of queries that aren't necessary in order
to fulfill the business logic that you've got coded.
So, especially in n-to-many relationships
to make sure that your fetch type is lazy
is a very important aspect of performance.
Okay, let's go on to the observability part
of our lesson here because this is
where the game is won or lost.
You can know all that you need to know theoretically
about all of the previous topics,
but if you can't observe the behaviors
and measure it and make adjustments, then it's just no use.
So we're going to go into a demonstration now
and talk about observability of queries and statistics.
Two things I want to show you.
I want to show you a property
that will allow your application at runtime
to dump details about your queries into your logs
and also deeper level statistics about your queries.
The important properties here are the org.Hibernate.SQL
must be set to debug.
When you have that property set to debug, every time,
I've got a running application here ready to show you,
every time you fire a query,
it will get dumped into the log just as we see here.
See the org.Hibernate.SQL,
which is set to debug is now pumping out messages,
telling us exactly what queries we fired with each request.
Another important one, and also a slightly dangerous one,
is the generate statistics property,
Hibernate.generate_statistics.
When you set that true,
you will get more detailed statistics about your queries.
Here is an example of a fully fledged statistics dump
in which we're talking about the JDBC connection usage,
the batch usage, the level two cache hits and misses
that we talked about earlier.
So enabling statistics can give you a lot of information
into your logs, however, it's expensive
and don't do this in a production scenario
because it is a performance drain.
But this is really what I want to show you.
I want to show you how to register all of this information
on caches, connections, and queries through the actuator
that we looked at in a previous lesson.
The way to do this is in your palm.XML.
If you put a dependency on this org.Hibernate,
Hibernate micrometer artifact,
then you get a lot of things available to you.
Let's start with a look at the actuator metrics
for our application.
We did cover actuator in a previous lesson,
and you'll recall that you can hit this directory
and see a list of all the metrics that Spring boot
is exposing for you.
And in here, we have a category called metrics.
Now that we expose our metrics, we see a lot
of statistics here that we didn't see the first time
we reviewed this functionality.
We see connection pool usage, we see query statistics,
and we see cache statistics.
All of this makes it possible then to surface all
of these details and performance metrics
inside a tool like Prometheus,
which we also looked at in a previous lesson.
So previously, when we looked at these
we could not see some of these items,
but by putting it into our palm.XML,
we can, for example, have a look at the health
of our connection pool.
So one of the things we can at here
is connection pool statistics.
We can have a look at the hikari connections,
which will give us a count of how many connections we have
in our pool configured.
We have actually two applications here that we're tracking,
and we have statistics on both of them showing us
that each connection pool has configured 10 connections.
Then we can also see, let's see hikari connections idle.
Hikari connections idle will show us
how many we have unused in our connection pool.
Now you can't really see it here
because I have got a quiet local app,
but this will keep track of your usage over time.
So this is a gauge that will show you
over time how many connections you had idle.
And this is an example of something
if you have too many connections configured,
many of them are sitting idle, you can free up some
of that memory space and reduce the size
of your connection pool.
So that's just one example of metrics that you can observe
in quite a lot of detail,
how your connection pool is happening.
Let's have a look at some cache metrics.
These metrics will be here
under the Hibernate cache category.
Oh, this is something I don't like about Prometheus,
at least I haven't figured out how to only put one unit
of querying there in the box at a time.
So this is telling us that in our cache,
our query plan is executing a certain number of hits.
We have got hits and misses,
and that's telling us how effective our cache
is being in terms of is it providing use.
What you want to see is a fairly high number
of hits in your cache.
And when you're only getting misses that tells you
that maybe you're not using it
as effectively as you could, for instance.
And then finally, just the queries in general.
We can look at a metric called, just as for example,
there's a rich set of metrics here,
I'm just showing you some examples,
Hibernate query, Hibernate query executions,
max number of seconds.
So for both of the applications that I'm monitoring here,
it's telling us over time,
we have graph over time telling us
what the longest query we fired is four
and five seconds here, respectively.
So all kinds of useful information.
And the final thing I want to explain is that
because you can surface these metrics using actuator
in such a straightforward fashion,
just by configuring the dependencies
that your application draws in,
the bar is very low for you as a developer
to be able to see real metrics for your running application.
If you can point your local running application
to a production-like database or something even close,
and if you can load there in your local situation,
use your favorite load runner to create some type
of load against your application,
you can very quickly get a feel for
if your configurations are being effective or not.
It might not be exactly a production scenario,
but you can certainly see where weaknesses are
and things to investigate further.
So that's a bit about Hibernate performance
and in particular observability
of key metrics with Hibernate.